# Data Visualization Portfolio

Allison M. Towey, *The University of Chicago*

- [Literature Review]
- [Men’s Alcohol Consumption and Women’s Experiences of Intimate Partner Violence in Ukraine](https://atowey-uchi.github.io/data_visualization/ua-ipv/code%20%2B%20data/ua-ipv.html)
- [Global Access to Safe Drinking Water](https://atowey-uchi.github.io/data_visualization/drinking_water/index.html)
- [Covid-19 and Transportation: How the Pandemic Affected Where We Went and How We Got There](https://atowey-uchi.github.io/data_visualization/covid-transpo/code%20%2B%20data/index.html)
- [Average Reported Happiness by Race, Age, and Parental Status, 2018 and 2021](https://atowey-uchi.github.io/data_visualization/parent_happiness/README.md)

  In this portfolio, you will find a literature review and four data visualization projects that showcase the primary theoretical insights from the literature across a range of social science domains. The portfolio aims to demonstrate how the theoretical principles can be applied to real-world scenarios and how effective data visualization can enhance understanding and communication of complex information for different audiences.
Creating effective visualizations requires an understanding of the subject matter, the audience, and the goals of the communication. In the social sciences, this means understanding the theories and concepts that underlie the data, as well as the specific audience that the visualization is intended to reach. By carefully considering these factors, data visualizations can be designed to convey key insights and facilitate understanding among different audiences, whether they are academics, policymakers, or the general public.

  The first visualization, “Men’s Alcohol Consumption and Women’s Experiences of Intimate Partner Violence in Ukraine” is intended for a more technical social scientific audience. It is written as an intended published data visualization journal article like those in the Data Visualization Collection from the American Sociological Association’s Socius Journal. The project includes one data visualization with 500 words of accompanying text describing the findings and main themes of the visualization. This visualization uses a novel style of visualization, a modified waffle chart, to depict frequencies. This chart style, though perhaps not familiar to most viewers, clearly displays the relationships between men’s alcohol consumption and their wives’ experiences of intimate partner violence in Ukraine. Additionally, as the audience is a published social science research community, the accompanying text is more technical and sparsely written as this is the primary style in the community and emphasizes clarity and simplicity over embellishment.

  The second visualization, “Global Access to Safe Drinking Water”, has a different intended message, audience, and dataset. Instead of one novel visualization that elucidates relationships in the data, this infographic-style data visualization contains a series of familiar data visualization styles, including choropleth maps, line and bar graphs, and scatter plots from a variety of related sources. The use of multiple visual elements and data sources allows for a more complete understanding of the issue and highlights the interconnected nature of the challenges and potential solutions. The visualization is designed to communicate the urgency of the issue and the potential benefits of action, while also providing actionable information for policymakers, advocates, and community members. The use of familiar, more visually appealing graphics intends to reach and appeal to the general public and highlight the issue overall as opposed to delving deeply into one aspect.

  The third visualization, “Covid-19 and Transportation: How the Pandemic Affected Where We Went and How We Got There” also has a focus on the general public as the audience, but is written as a journalism piece rather than an infographic style. This set of visualizations explores the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on transportation patterns using a combination of maps, line charts, and bar charts. It is designed to communicate the drastic changes in transportation patterns caused by the pandemic, from the sharp decrease in transportation of all kinds, including most specifically, public transit ridership and aviation. By presenting the data in a journalistic style, the visualization makes the data more accessible to a broad audience and emphasizes the significance of the findings. Like the second visualization, this article intends to inform, and thus, a variety of data sources are used. The emphasis in this piece is the connection between text and graphics that augment the text. This multimedia piece highlights a specific trend in recent history in an accessible and visually appealing manner.
  
  Finally, the fourth visualization is more of a general purpose data visualization that is intended for both the public and for academic research. It is an example of exploratory data visualization, where the researcher may not know the connections in the data before plotting them. As a result, t​his small multiples chart displays bar graphs of average reported happiness by race, age, and parental status in 2018 and 2021, enabling easy comparison across categories before and during the pandemic. The chart indicates that overall happiness has slightly decreased, but differences based on race, age, and parental status exist, effectively communicating these trends in a clear and concise manner and spurring potential new research about the social relationship between age, parental status, and race during the pandemic.
  
  Each of these visualizations has an emphasis on understanding the audience and attempting to craft visualizations that are simple, clear, accurate, and effectively targeted. Understanding the audience is a crucial aspect of effective data visualization, as it determines the design choices and presentation style that will be most effective in communicating the desired message. As shown throughout the portfolio, the choice of visualization type, color scheme, and level of detail is tailored to the audience’s level of expertise and familiarity with the data. Overall, this portfolio seeks to demonstrate that effective data visualization requires an understanding of the audience and a deliberate, digestible design approach that takes into account the specific message, data, and intended impact.

